---
title: \"Twenty years too late\" – our review of COP26
author: Gina Cortés Valderrama
header:
  image: /assets/images/posts/2021/twenty_years_to_late/COP26-08-11-Annabelle-Avril-WECF-9.jpg
  caption: "Photo credit: Annabelle Avril/WECF"
tags:
  - cop26
categories:
  - cop26
show_date: true
toc: true
toc_label: "My Table of Contents"
toc_icon: "cog"
---

The 26th Conference of the Parties to the UNFCCC (COP26) held in Glasgow from
October 31 to November 13 had as a central objective to bring countries from all
over the world to reach tangible and real agreements enabling us to collectively
fulfil the goal of the Paris Agreement. At this conference, the decisions taken
should have defined the “rules of the game” for the implementation of specific
policies and actions for the reduction of CO2 emissions and adaptation to
climate change. It’s crucial to understand that climate change is not only an
environmental problem but also involves social and political challenges with a
highly ethical component, that needs to take human rights and the welfare of
living beings into precedence.

[Millions of people are already living in a permanent state of crisis being
constantly threatened by the rapidly escalating effects of climate
change](https://www.rosalux.de/en/dossiers/climate-justice) as a result of
extractivist models sponsored by developed countries in developing territories.
Cycles of poverty, forced displacement, political instability and resource
conflicts are exacerbated, particularly in countries from the Global South. That
is why climate policies at all levels must follow the principle of climate
justice and ensure the integration of groups that are already disproportionately
affected by climate change. Was this achieved at COP26 ? No. Despite being
publicly heralded as the most inclusive COP by the UK presidency, it failed to
deliver on that discourse as well as on real climate ambition.

<figure>
  <a
    href="/assets/images/posts/2021/twenty_years_to_late/COP26-08-11-Annabelle-Avril-WECF-11-1024x683.jpg">
  <img src="/assets/images/posts/2021/twenty_years_to_late/COP26-08-11-Annabelle-Avril-WECF-11-1024x683.jpg">
  </a> 
  <figcaption> 
    
  </figcaption>
</figure>

## Guarantees for civil society participation

Limitations to meaningful participation during COP26 began with discriminatory
visa processes, high accommodation costs in Glasgow, and vaccine apartheid.
These, along with other causes, prevented the participation of intersectional
feminist groups, indigenous, Afro-descendant and LGBTIQ+ communities, as well as
youth and peasants, mainly from the Global South. However, this was only the
beginning of a long list of barriers. Those who managed to afford and overcome
this, experienced on-site restrictions as access to the negotiations rooms was
[limited to 36 out of the 11,700 registered civil society
observers](https://twitter.com/duycks/status/1455517184529215490) during the
first days of the COP. The rest of the participants were invited to follow the
negotiations on a virtual platform that failed to transmit the entirety of the
talks.

The consequences of the lack of civil society participation were reflected in
the conclusions of the COP. A clear mirror of the root causes of this
environmental crisis. Decisions that will have a high impact on our present and
future are taken mainly by an exclusive and privileged group of white men
belonging to developed countries, which favour corporate actors that put
monetary gains over people. This while the voices of women in all their
diversity, youth, indigenous and afro-descendant communities are not taken into
consideration. As Mary Robinson said: [“COP26 is too male, too pale, too
stale”](https://twitter.com/TheElders/status/1457670249235587074).

## Ambition at COP26 made some progress… Perhaps what was required 20 years ago

The latest report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) on the
[key findings in the Working Group I contribution to the Sixth Assessment
Report](https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg1/) has been clear: Human influence on
climate change is unequivocal. Immediate, rapid, deep and large-scale GHG
reductions involving societal, and systems transition are required. Climate
change depends on the decisions we make now. And the negotiations did not meet
the level of ambition and urgency required to address this crisis.

Parties moved forward promoting the expansion of market mechanisms such as
carbon trading, [without references to the obligation of
states](https://www.amnesty.org/en/wp-content/uploads/2021/11/IOR4049812021ENGLISH-1.pdf)
to respect the right of Afro-descendants and Indigenous peoples to free, prior
and informed consent. Even though an independent grievance mechanism was
secured, the rules for the implementation of Article 6 of the Paris Agreement
leave loopholes that could undermine its goals and the protection of human
rights. But just like carbon trading, more narratives promoting [false solutions
such as the so-called nature-based solutions (NbS) and Net Zero were widely
used, imposing a threat that gives way to the continuation of colonial and
extractivist models](https://www.wecf.org/false_solutions/).

One of the most critical points that were obstructed by developed countries was
climate finance. [The creation of a Loss and Damage fund to compensate
communities who have already lost their homes and livelihoods from floods,
droughts, heatwaves and rising sea
levels](https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2021/nov/16/indigenous-climate-activists-cop26-endangers-native-communities)
did not get the green light from several countries. This lack of commitment and
responsibility occurs in a context in which, according to the [new report of the
International Monetary Fund
(IMF)](https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/WP/Issues/2021/09/23/Still-Not-Getting-Energy-Prices-Right-A-Global-and-Country-Update-of-Fossil-Fuel-Subsidies-466004),
global fossil fuel subsidies amounted to $6 trillion in 2020, equating to $11m
per minute. Just 8 per cent of these fossil fuels subsidies reflects
undercharging for supply costs (explicit subsidies) and 92 per cent reflects
undercharging for environmental costs and foregone consumption taxes (implicit
subsidies). For the very first time, the term ´fossil fuels´ (excluding oil and
gas) and the need to phase-down (instead of phase-out) coal power and
inefficient fossil fuel subsidies were included in the final decision text of
the COP. While this is a step forward in naming one of the major drivers of this
climate crisis, the text falls short of providing clear objectives for
transformative policymaking.

## People’s power, climate justice!

One thing became very clear at this Climate Summit: real action is driven by the
people. It is civil society that demonstrates this forcefully while demanding
ambitious commitments and solutions for a more sustainable future. This was
reflected in the Glasgow “Climate March” on the 6th of November, which saw more
than [250,000 people come together to raise their
voices](https://edition.cnn.com/world/live-news/cop26-summit-2021-protests-11-06-21-intl/index.html).
Indigenous communities, Afro-descendants, LGBTIQ+, women, youth, peasants, among
many other groups demanded that their governments and the international
community gathered in Glasgow come to substantial conclusions in which human
rights and just climate action are a priority. Several feminist groups from the
Women and Gender Constituency (WGC) who were able to attend the COP and
represent their communities marched voicing [our message and key demands for the
outcomes of COP26](https://womengenderclimate.org/wgc-cop26-key-demands/).

Representatives of the UNFCCC civil society constituencies, including the WGC,
took the stage at COP26 for a “People´s Plenary” session organized together with
the [COP26
Coalition](https://cop26coalition.org/peoples-plenary-red-line-parade-and-movement-rally-at-cop26/).
After making our voices heard for climate justice, [hundreds of people then left
plenary](https://www.bbc.com/news/uk-scotland-glasgow-west-59260776) singing
“people´s power” and holding a red line to symbolise the lines which have been
crossed by the 26th UN Climate Summit in not delivering the just and urgent
commitments that were needed.

In addition, with different campaigns and demonstrations inside and outside the
COP, the participation of those that were absent, was virtually integrated by
amplifying their voices at the conference and on social media through the
hashtag #MissingVoicesCOP26. The WGC led a #FeminstClimateJustice colour
campaign addressing a different topic each day and using colourful hygiene masks
to attract greater attention. This was a huge success, as the campaign achieved
visibility in major media outlets such as the
[BBC](https://www.bbc.com/news/live/world-59155537) and [The
Guardian](https://www.theguardian.com/environment/gallery/2021/nov/03/cop26-finance-protest-and-indigenous-voices-in-pictures).

<figure> 
  <a
    href="/assets/images/posts/2021/twenty_years_to_late/COP26-06-11-Annabelle-Avril-WECF-51-1024x683.jpg">
  <img
    src="/assets/images/posts/2021/twenty_years_to_late/COP26-06-11-Annabelle-Avril-WECF-51-1024x683.jpg">
  </a> 
  <figcaption> 
    
  </figcaption>
</figure>

## This is what gender-just climate action looks like!

As governments disappointed us on climate ambition, it was local initiatives led
by women in different communities that promoted exemplary and transformative
models for climate adaptation and mitigation at high-level events during COP26.
Such is the case of the project led by [Pauline Lancon, Gender Just Climate
Solutions awardee
2019](https://www.wecf.org/gender-just-climate-solutions-5th-edition/), who was
invited as panelist in an event organized by the UK COP-Presidency, alongside
guests such as Dr Rose Mwebaza, Director at the UN Climate Technology Centre and
Network (CTCN) and Dr Tamsin Edwards, IPCC Author and Climate Scientist. In this
panel, Pauline emphasized the importance of integrating a gender perspective in
the implementation of climate technologies, innovation and science. Similarly,
[Lucie Gamond-Rius, 2021
awardee](https://www.wecf.org/gender-just-climate-solutions-edition-2021/), and
[Trupti Jain, 2018 winner](https://www.wecf.org/gjcs-2018/), participated in the
[Gender
Dialogue](https://unfccc.int/topics/gender/events-meetings/gender-day-other-events-at-cops/gender-women-at-cop-26#eq-3)
organized by UN Women during Gender Day. Thanks to their experience working
closely with communities, both representatives shared lessons learned and best
practices on ways to ensure the development and implementation of
gender-responsive adaptation and mitigation technologies. WECF also demonstrated
its strong commitment to biodiversity protection by hosting an event on the
French pavilion. Based on their practical experience, [Karen Dubois and Dorothee
Lisenga, winners of the Gender Just Climate Solutions
Awards](https://www.wecf.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/02/GJCS_English_Final-1.pdf),
discussed the interconnections between biodiversity and gender justice with
Ronan Dantec, French Senator and Jean-Luc Redaud, administrator of 4D.

At the panel discussion of the [European Union’s side event on “Just
Transition”](https://www.wecf.org/wecf-at-cop26-eu-side-event-on-just-transition/),
WECF Director Sascha Gabizon brought feminist flaws in the energy transition to
the table: energy poverty in Europe mainly affects single womxn, the European
Green Deal adheres to patriarchal standards and funds flow mainly to places
where male socialised people benefit. She made it clear that the inclusion of
intersectional aspects in the upcoming transformation is inevitable and that “a
gender-equitable Green Deal benefits society and the economy”.

During the sixth ceremony of the [Gender Just Climate Solutions
Awards](https://www.wecf.org/gjcs/), organized in the Blue Zone on November 8th,
we were very proud to [announce the new award winners and launch the
publication](https://www.wecf.org/gender-just-climate-solutions-edition-2021/).
The awards ceremony featured the participation of high-level guests such as Åsa
Regnér, UN Women Deputy Executive Director, Abdou Karim Sall, Minister of the
Environment & Sustainable Development, Senegal, Kitty van der Heijden, Director
General for International Cooperation of the Netherlands, among others.

The Gender Just Climate Solutions Awards show that relevant gender-just climate
solutions are already happening around the world. They aim for transformative,
inclusive development models and help to rethink growth. With real commitments
from governments, e.g., in terms of finance and technology, we can upscale these
inclusive solutions to have a significant impact, not only locally but also on
the global level.

## A strong step forward!

One of the most important achievements for civil society representatives during
this conference was the securing of three seats on the Advisory Board of the
Climate Technology Center and Network (CTCN) for the observer constituencies
YOUNGO, Indigenous Peoples Organisations and Women and Gender. Thanks to the
collective advocacy work led by WECF and leaders of youth and indigenous
people’s organizations over the last years, we now have a seat at the table of a
UNFCCC body responsible for climate technology transfer and development.

This is a strong step forward towards integrating and understanding the
priorities, needs, but above all, solutions that youth, indigenous communities
and women in all their diversity can provide to address climate change. It is a
step forward in guaranteeing the meaningful participation and contribution of
communities at the frontline in decision-making spaces.
